.\" manpage was created with the following commands and then manually edited:
.\" pandoc -s -f markdown -t man ../README.rst > README.1
.\" help2man -n "mp4 time code editor" -N -s1 --no-discard-stderr ../mp4fpsmod > mp4fpsmod.1
.\"
.TH MP4FPSMOD "1" "March 2014" "0.24" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mp4fpsmod \- Tiny mp4 time code editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
mp4fpsmod [options] FILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
You can use this for changing fps, delaying audio tracks, executing DTS
compression, extracting time codes of mp4.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-o\fR <file>
Specify MP4 output filename.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-print\fR <file>
Output current timecodes into timecode\-v2 format.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-tcfile\fR <file>
Edit timecodes with timecode\-v2 file.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-optimize\fR
Optimize timecode
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-fps\fR <nframes:fps>
Edit timecodes with the spec.
You can specify \fB\-r\fR more than two times, to produce
VFR movie.
"nframes" is number of frames, which "fps" is
aplied to.
0 as nframes means "rest of the movie"
"fps" is a rational or integer.
For example, 25 or 30000/1001.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-compress\-dts\fR
Enable DTS compression.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-delay\fR <n>
Delay audio by n millisecond.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-timescale\fR <keep|n>
keep: Keep original timescale.
n: Set timescale of videotrack to n.
.PP
.PP
In any cases, the original mp4 is kept as it is (not touched).
\-o is required except when you specify \-p.
On the other hand, when you specify \-p, other options are ignored.
.PP
\-t and \-r are exclusive, and cannot be set both at the same time.
\-c, \-d, \-x can be set standalone, or with \-t or \-r.
.PP
When you specify one of \-t, \-r, \-x, \-c, \-d, timecode is
edited/rewritten.
Otherwise without \-p, input is just copied with moov\->mdat order,
without timecode editing.
.PP
You should always set \-c when you set \-t, \-r, \-d, \-x, if you want
your output widely playable with video/audio in sync, especially with
hardware players.
Read about DTS compression for details.
.PP
Beware that mp4fpsmod ignores edts/elst of input, and when timecode is
edited, edts/elst of video/audio tracks are deleted, and re\-inserted as
needed.
Therefore, if the input has already some audio delays, you have to
always specify it with \-d.
.PP
.SS Examples
.PP
Read foo.mp4, change fps to 25, and save to bar.mp4:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-r\ 0:25\ \-o\ bar.mp4\ foo.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Read foo.mp4, change fps of first 300 frames to 30000/1001, next 600
frames to 24000/1001, and rest of the movie to 30000/1001 (producing VFR
movie):
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-r\ 300:30000/1001\ \-r\ 600:24000/1001\ \-r\ 0:30000/1001\ \-o\ bar.mp4\ foo.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Edit timecodes of foo.mp4 with timecode_v2 described in timecode.txt,
and save to bar.mp4:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-t\ timecode.txt\ foo.mp4\ \-o\ bar.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Same as above example, with DTS compression enabled and timecodes
optimization:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-t\ timecode.txt\ \-x\ \-c\ foo.mp4\ \-o\ bar.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Read timecodes of foo.mp4 and save to timecode.txt:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-p\ timecode.txt\ foo.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Execute DTS compression, and save to bar.mp4:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-c\ foo.mp4\ \-o\ bar.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Delay audio by 100ms using edts/elst:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-d\ 100\ foo.mp4\ \-o\ bar.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Delay audio by \-200ms using DTS/CTS shifting:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
mp4fpsmod\ \-d\ \-200\ \-c\ foo.mp4\ \-o\ bar.mp4
\f[]
.fi
.SS About timecode optimization
.PP
Consider timecode file like this:
.PP
# timecode format v2 0 33 67 100 133 167 200
.PP
This is the example of timecodes for 30000/1001 fps movie.
.PD 0
.P
.PD
In this case, each timeDelta of entries are 33, 34, 33, 33, 34, 33...
.PP
When \-x option is given, and when timecodes are integer values,
mp4fpsmod tries to divide timecodes into groups, whose entries have time
delta very close to each other.
Then, average each group\[aq]s time delta into one floating point value.
.PP
mp4fpsmod also tries to do further optimization when \-x option
specified.
If every timeDelta of frames looks like close enough to one of the well
known NTSC or PAL rate, mp4fpsmod takes the latter, and do the exact
math, instead of floating point calcuration.
.PP
You can control these behaviors by \-x option.
Without \-x, literal values in the timecodes_v2 file will be used.
.SS About DTS Compression
.PP
By default, mp4fpsmod produces rather straightforward DTS.
For example, when you specify \-r 300:30000/1001 \-r400 24000/1001,
.IP \[bu] 2
TimeScale is set to 120000, which is LCM of 30000 and 24000
.IP \[bu] 2
DTS is like 0, 4004, 8008,...
for first 300 frames.
For next 400 frames, DTS delta is 5005.
.IP \[bu] 2
CTS is like DTS, except that it is arranged in the composition order,
instead of decoding/frame order.
.PP
In the mp4 container, stts box(which holds DTS delta) will look like
this:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
<TimeToSampleEntry\ SampleDelta="4004"\ SampleCount="300"/>
<TimeToSampleEntry\ SampleDelta="5005"\ SampleCount="400"/>
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Timecodes of this movie will be something like this, if B\-frame is
used:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
DTS\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ CTS
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
0\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 0(I)
4004\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 12012(P)
8008\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 4004(B)
12012\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 8008(B)
16016\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 24024(P)
20020\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 16016(B)
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
\f[]
.fi
.PP
However, this doesn\[aq]t satisfy DTS <= CTS, for some frames.
Therefore, we have to shift(delay) CTS.
Finally, we get:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-
DTS\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ CTS
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-
0\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 4004
4004\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 16016
8008\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 8008
12012\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 12012
16016\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 28028
20020\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 20020
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-
\f[]
.fi
.PP
As you can see, CTS of first frame is non\-zero value, therefore has
delay of 4004, in timescale unit.
This delay value is, by default, saved into edts/elst box.
If your player handles edts/elst properly, this is fine.
However, there\[aq]s many players in the wild, which lacks edts support.
If you are using them, you might find video/audio out of sync.
.PP
DTS compression comes for this reason.
If you enable DTS compression with "\-c" option, mp4fpsmod produces
smaller DTS at beginning, and minimizes the CTS delay without the help
of edts/elst box.
With DTS compression, DTS and CTS will be something like this:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-
DTS\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ CTS
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-
0\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 0
2002\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 12012
4004\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 4004
8008\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 8008
12012\ \ \ \ \ \ \ 24024
16016\ \ \ \ \ \ \ 16016
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ \-\-\-\-\-
\f[]
.fi
.SS About audio delay
.PP
You can specify audio delay with \-d option.
Delay is in milliseconds, and both positive and negative values are
valid.
.PP
When you don\[aq]t enable DTS compression with \-c, delay is just
achieved with edts/elst setting.
If positive, video track\[aq]s edts is set.
Otherwise, each audio track\[aq]s edts is set.
.PP
When you enable DTS compression, DTS/CTS are directly shifted to reflect
the delay.
When delay is positive, smaller DTS/CTS are assigned for the beginning
of movie, so that video plays faster and audio is delayed, until it
reaches the specified delay time.
Negative delay is achieved mostly like the positive case, except that
bigger DTS/CTS are used, and video plays slower.
.SH AUTHORS
nu774 <honeycomb77@gmail.com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mp4art (1),
.BR mp4file (1),
.BR mp4subtitle (1),
.BR mp4track (1),
.BR GPAC (1),
.BR MP4Box (1),
.BR MP4Client (1)
